---
layout: post
title: "Metaday"
excerpt: "I had a dream, it was lame."
---

I had a brief lucid dream last night, though it was a short exploration of my surroundings
before I noticed my lucidity. I was at my primary school in the infant yard, it was empty
with no-one in sight, I assumed lessons were on. I wandered around and inspected the detail of the
worn red bricks and rusted green fencing before sitting under the large tree
that shrouded the small patch of grass. I'm unsure why and how I was there, but the detail
was impressive.

I heard footsteps approaching. The yard was eerily quiet for somewhere located by a
main road and flanked by full classrooms of infants, but this contradiction did not yet
faze me.

It was here that I felt something particularly odd and majorly disconcerting. I was immediately
aware of two different levels of (un)consciousness in my mind. The first - the *lucid* - acknowledged
the approacher and recognised him as my old headteacher; however the second - the *dreamer* -
was clearly orchestrating the underlying plot of the dream and withholding information from
the first mind. I felt a release of adrenalin. I wasn't supposed to be seen.

In a very short time several inconsistencies racked up and just stating the obivous;
the school's extension was missing, the demountables had not been removed and that
headteacher had moved on years ago. It was not 2015 and thus I was a time traveller.

I couldn't reveal my identity and rattled out some Ferris-Bueller level cover story
to get away. I then decided to do what one should apparently never do, and find myself.

Despite not knowing what year it was, I knew the classroom I was supposed to be heading for.
It was the one furthest away from my current location and the only thing that stood between me
and a shattered time-space continuum was a long dead-straight corridor adorned with increasingly
competent[^1] framed drawings, stories, poems: each accompanied by a gold star or patronising novelty stamp.

The corridor gave me a long chance to think; what would I say? How cautious should I be?
I thought about all the things I've done, the jobs I've had, how I ended up at Aberystwyth,
the people I've met, the people I've dated. I knew anything I said could potentially alter my
entire future. I could inform myself of almost any technology or world event and
change the futures of millions. Suddenly this all felt very dangerous and yet my curiosity
was far too great, would I even recognise myself?

I reached the classroom door, popped it open and interrupted the lesson. I recognised my
Year 6 teacher and around thirty pairs of eyes were all looking at me, I knew them all.
It was exhilarating, I had travelled in time and it had worked. This was supposed to be
impossible. I looked around, everything was in the right place, down to where my old friends
were sat.

I was brought out of my trance by a demanding "Yes?".  
I couldn't see myself amongst the eyes fixated on me: "I'm looking for Sam Nicholls, can we borrow him please?", I asked anyway.

The teacher replied:

> **"Sorry. Sam isn't here for meta-day."**

The dream terminates.

[^1]: The original school was built around a straight corridor and each progressive classroom held the next year group.
